# Spatial-variability-in-environmental-DNA-concentrations-on-river-cross-sections-sampling-abundance
The repository is for data, code, and metadata related to the manuscript: Spatial variability in environmental DNA concentrations on river cross sections: implications for sampling design and abundance estimation. This repository will be used as a home for resources for the publication

# Project Abstract
High variance across repeated measurements of environmental DNA (eDNA) concentrations may be partially responsible for the mixed efficacy of eDNA concentration as a proxy for aquatic organism abundance or biomass in streams. While environmental factors such as temperature and stream discharge are commonly used to explain variability in eDNA concentrations, few studies have assessed variability of eDNA concentration across river cross sections and rarely do eDNA studies incorporate spatially stratified sampling to account for variability within a site. We used droplet digital PCR to measure the concentration of extra-organismal eDNA from Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) and the organismal eDNA from their abundant and pathogenic myxozoan parasite, Ceratonova shasta, in water samples collected from six cross sections of a river (basin area ≅ 40,000 km2). Concentrations of eDNA were heterogeneously distributed on river cross sections varying from non-detectable levels to 257,222 copies per liter. Within cross sections the coefficient of variation (COV) of eDNA concentration spanned from 0.40 to 1.43. We found that to estimate the mean eDNA concentration at a river cross section with a level of statistical power (COV = 0.2), the number of spatially stratified water samples varied by species and cross section. For C. shasta, an average of 15 one-liter samples were necessary, while O. tshawytscha required an average of 11 one-liter samples. A generalized linear mixed effected model fit to the C. shasta data did not explain a meaningful amount of variability in eDNA concentration, but the model fit to the O. tshawytscha data identified a pattern where eDNA concentrations decreased with sample depth.

# Installation
All metadata compiled and annotated using The MetadataWizard by USGS Fort Collins Science Center Version 2.0.8 : https://github.com/DOI-USGS/fort-pymdwizard Open data/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX.xml with MetadaWizard for all metadata reference Analysis conducted using: RStudio 2024.12.0+467 "Kousa Dogwood" Release (cf37a3e5488c937207f992226d255be71f5e3f41, 2024-12-11) for windows Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) RStudio/2024.12.0+467 Chrome/126.0.6478.234 Electron/31.7.6 Safari/537.36, Quarto 1.5.57 R version 4.4.2 (2024-10-31 ucrt) -- "Pile of Leaves" Copyright (C) 2024 The R Foundation for Statistical Computing Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64

# Contribute
Please contact the corresponding authors of the paper for information about this repository or about collaborating on future work.

#Code References
H. Rue, S. Martino, and N. Chopin. (2009). Approximate Bayesian inference for latent Gaussian models using integrated nested Laplace approximations (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B,71(2):319{392}

Zuur, A. F., Ieno, E. N., Walker, N., Saveliev, A. A., & Smith, G. M. (2009). Mixed effects models and extensions in ecology with R. Springer New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-87458-6
